\chapter{Design \& Implementation}

# API Design

In [@sec:bg-api-analysis] we evaluated a number of existing APIs; based on that information we decided to adopt a REST architectural
style in designing our API. Additionally, the APIs in [@sec:bg-api-analysis] heavily inspired the design of our API.

Our progressive webapp uses its own _public_ API (rooted at `/v1/`) wherever possible (this is known as "dogfooding"), but we predict that
certain pages may take a while to load if multiple requests are involved. One example of such a page would be the a user's profile, where
one request would be `/v1/users?username=qaisjp&exact=1` to find the user by username and get their user information and
then `/v1/users/1/resources` to list their resources.

In response to whether a website use its own public API, Evers says that one "should not be updating the API frequently", that they should
"spend the time to architect and proof out an API that will stay around for a while"
and that "dogfooding in this way will enforce [this]" [-@ownapi-2].

Finally, Dante also says "Unless the performance overhead of using the web service is an issue, you should definitely use your public API.
This will help you get a consistent behavior between your application and the consumers. It will also avoid code duplication [...]" [-@ownapi-3]

Based on this, we have chosen to also make use of _private_ internal endpoints. This will allow us to
"make data access more performant by using the database directly instead of doing extra requests" [@ownapi-1].
These internal endpoints live at `/_/` instead of the regular `/v1/` prefix, discouraging those that reverse engineer our webapp from building
software using these endpoints.

<!-- other links:
- https://softwareengineering.stackexchange.com/questions/332864/fully-api-based-website-is-it-a-good-idea -->

## Permission management

We've decided that permissions will be granular for site administrators,
but simple on a resource level. Original creators of a resource retain
permanent access rights, and they can also designate additional resource
administrators. These designated resource admins have all the same
permissions as the creator.

## Authentication

Authentication is implemented as a middleware.

Initially we had two middleware functions:

-   `authRequired` - this is returned by the JWT library\
    (`authMiddleware.MiddlewareFunc()`). Any route that includes this
    middleware function requires the request to have an authenticated
    user.

-   *authMaybeRequired* - this is a function we've created that, if an
    auth token is provided, verifies the user (via `authRequired`), and
    otherwise sets the \"user\" context variable to *nil*.

This works well when *authMaybeRequired* isn't used frequently, but we
soon discovered that a lot of our routes included this. Some entities -
resources, packages, gallery items --- may be in a state that means that
they should only be accessible to resource managers and site admins.

We decided to change to three middleware functions:

-   *authMiddlewareFunc* - this is returned by the JWT library\
    via *authMiddleware.MiddlewareFunc()*, as *authRequired* above

-   *authMaybeRequired* - this is the same as above except it verifies
    the user via *authMiddlewareFunc*

-   *authRequired* - this is a function we've created that, if the
    \"user\" context variable is *nil*, will abort, and send a response
    containing:

    -   the header \"*WWW-Authenticate*\" to \"*JWT
        realm=multitheftauto.com*\",

    -   the status code to *401 Status Unauthorized*, and

    -   the body *{\"message\": \"You must be logged in to perform that
        operation.\"}*

Full list:

-   resources - unpublished resources, suspended resources

-   packages - draft packages

## Deletions

A common approach to deleting entities in webapps (todo: add source) is
to set an *is\_deleted* flag to *true* and simply hide the row from
output.

This is useful if we need to maintain an audit log or (considering that
deletions are destructive) would like to undo changes.

Users, however, may not approeciate a website holding onto data they've
requested to be deleted.

When deleting *resources* we can just do *delete from resources where
resource\_id =* and let PostgreSQL cascade this via foreign keys.

Doing this for general users has a few caveats:

-   If a user has requested a deletion, their comments should be
    anonymised

-   If an administrator has deleted the account, the admin should decide
    whether or not their comments should be removed too.

-   What if an admin decides, post-comment-retaining-deletion, that
    their posts should have indeed been deleted?

What if an administrator wants to delete their own account? Most actions
(like bans) have an admin user id associated, and the deletion of an
admin account should not delete all the associated bans!

Solutions here include:

-   For comments and bans, allow \"author\_id\" to be nullable. Show
    \"deleted\" in place.

-   When deleting user accounts, delete all the associated data, but
    keep the user row, and set `is_deleted` to true. We should also
    remove all personal data.

This is in line with GDPR as only PII needs to be removed. Comments do
not fall under GDPR.

## Upload packages

It is possible for a user to send many `POST
/v1/resources/:resource_id/pkg` requests, creating many blank packages.
These will all be created a draft packages until:

-   an actual file has been uploaded (and checked)

-   the user publishes the package (it is no longer in a "draft" state)

Once a file is uploaded by the client and is memory, we check the MIME
type of the uploaded file. If the file is not of the "application/zip"
MIME type, we return a "415 Unsupported Media Type" and discard the
data.

TODO THEN WE CHECK THE ZIP ITSELF IN memory

Once we've verified that the zip is safe to use, we upload to a storage
service using gocloud.dev/blob https://gocloud.dev/howto/blob.

> \"Blobs are a common abstraction for storing unstructured data on
> Cloud storage services and accessing them via HTTP. This guide shows
> how to work with blobs in the Go CDK.\"

This is useful as it is a generic backend for various file storage
services, including support for Google Cloud Storage, Amazon S3, Azure
Blob Service, and of course Local Storage. This makes the website
scalable and resilient as we can rely on one of those services doing
backups for us, and also use them to deliver stuff for us. Less
bandwidth. But we can still use Local Storage when sysadmins are testing
or if they would prefer to use local storage (if they do not want to pay
for an external service)

The gocloud.dev library gives us safety as it converts filenames to
something safe. This means that we don't have to worry about malicious
filenames when storing files locally.

The filename `../test` is stored as `..\_\_0x2f\_\_test`. This is
secure.

However, gocloud allows filenames to contain forward slashes (creating a
subfolder). Whilst we could ensure that our filename has no directory
separators, we chose to force filenames to be stored as "pkg\$ID.zip"
(such as pkg6.zip).

This additionally means that we don't need to write code to delete old
packages when reuploading a file (during initial package creation,
whilst in draft state). We can just rely on gocloud.dev replacing the
blob with the new file.

We only need to delete the files when packages are deleted!

When implementing this we tried to use io.Copy to copy from the input
file to the bucket writer, but we could not do this. So, from the advice
of
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/39791021/how-to-read-multiple-times-from-same-io-reader
we refactored our initial code to use io.TeeReader:
https://golang.org/pkg/io/\#TeeReader

We realised that TeeReader returns an io.Reader which does not implement
io.ReaderAt, so in the end we just used ioutil.ReadAll to read the
entire file into a \[\]bytes struct. This means that we don't need to
use a io.Copy, and can produce a io.ReaderAt for the zip library using
bytes.NewReader (which returns a bytes.Reader, which DOES implement
io.ReaderAt).
https://stackoverflow.com/questions/50539118/golang-unzip-response-body/50539327

> TeeReader returns a Reader that writes to w what it reads from r. All
> reads from r performed through it are matched with corresponding
> writes to w. There is no internal buffering - the write must complete
> before the read completes. Any error encountered while writing is
> reported as a read error.

## Error handling

Initially returning errors but this is leaky. NOw we just report
http.SttusInternalServerError and just log the error

## Selecting HTTP status codes

### 401 Unauthorized vs. 403 Forbidden

We have decided to select the following status codes for the following
scenarios:

-   401: being unauthenticated for a request that requires
    authentication

-   403: being authenticated but not authorized to perform an action

This might seem obvious, but the status text for *401* is *401
Unauthorized*, despite it being for authentication and not
authorization.

Sources: (todo: citationify)

-   https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3297048/403-forbidden-vs-401-unauthorized-http-responses

-   https://httpstatuses.com/401

-   https://httpstatuses.com/403
