## Error handling {#sec:api-err}

We initially returned all errors to the user, even internal errors. This is a security weakness, specifically CWE-209 "an error message that includes sensitive information about its environment, users, or associated data" [@CWE209GenerationError]. Instead, we should simply log internal errors, and if those errors are fatal, we should have a standard response with:

- HTTP status code 500, which represents "Internal Server Error", and
- a standard JSON result

Listing [@lst:api-somethingWentWrong] shows our simplification of error handling by creating a helper function `API.somethingWentWrong(...)`, and shows how we use that function inside `API.getCurrentUserProfile`:

(1) `somethingWentWrong`
    a. Declare `API.somethingWentWrong`, that takes a HTTP context (`*gin.Context`) and an error handle (`error`), and returns a log entry.
    b. Abort the request with status code 500 and return the following JSON:

        ```json
        { "message": "Something went wrong" }
        ```

    c. Return a log entry with the given error as a context
(2) `getUserFollowers`
    a. Access the database to get the user's followers, which is an operation that can fail.
    b. Check whether the operation failed.
    c. Call `API.somethingWentWrong`, which mutates the HTTP request and returns a log entry.
    d. Annotate the return log entry with the user's ID, to help aid debugging.
    e. Print the log entry using the "Error" level to the server log.

```go
// (1a) Declaration
func (a *API) somethingWentWrong(
  ctx *gin.Context,
  err error,
) *logrus.Entry {
  ctx.AbortWithStatusJSON(http.StatusInternalServerError, gin.H{
    "message": "Something went wrong",
  }) // (1b) Abort Request
  return a.Log.WithError(err) // (1c) Return Log Entry
}

func (a *API) getUserFollowers(ctx *gin.Context) {
  user := ctx.MustGet("user").(*User)
  rows, err := user.GetFollowers(ctx, a.DB) // (2a) Access Database
  if err != nil { // (2b) Check Error
    a.somethingWentWrong(ctx, err). // (2c) Abort Request, Get Log Entry
      WithField("user_id", user.ID). // (2d) Annotate Log Entry
      Errorln("could not get this user's followers") // (2e) Print Error
    return
  }
  ctx.JSON(http.StatusOK, rows) // (2f) Success
}
```
: Helper function to log fatal internal errors with an example. {#lst:api-somethingWentWrong}
